Online gc outline (#1433)
dolthub/docs: content/reference/sql/server/garbage-collection.md

---
title: Garbage Collection
---

# When to run garbage collection on your SQL server

It is now safe to run garbage collection on your running SQL server. To prevent concurrent
writes potentially referencing garbage collected chunks, running
[`dolt_gc`](../version-control/dolt-sql-procedures.md#dolt_gc) will break all open
connections to the running server.

[Shallow GC](#shallow-gc) happens automatically for certain operations, so it's possible
it won't affect the size of your database that much when you run it.

> Online GC isn't safe yet on a cluster replica, but it will fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Performing GC on a cluster replica which is in standby mode is not yet supported, and running `call dolt_gc()` on the replica will fail.
```

# Offline GC vs Online GC

We originally implemented garbage collection for the offline use case. We didn't need to
worry about concurrent writes to the database. When we implemented online GC we needed a
way to make sure concurrent writes didn't reference garbage collected chunks. To make sure

> online GC runs safely, it currently breaks all open connections to a running server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
online GC runs safely, it currently breaks all open connections to a running server towards the end of the operation.

At the end of the run, the connection which ran `call dolt_gc()` will be left open in order to deliver the results of the operation itself. The connection will be left in a terminally broken state where any attempt to run a query on it will result in the following error:

`ERROR 1105 (HY000): this connection was established when this server performed an online garbage collection. this connection can no longer be used. please reconnect.`

The connection should be closed. In some connection pools it can be awkward to cause a single connection to actually close. If you need to run `call dolt_gc()` programmatically, one work around is to use a separate connection pool with a size of 1 which can be closed after the run is successful.
```

fast since it operates on a smaller set of data as most chunks are already in oldgen and
will be ignored.

For more detailed information about how garbage collection works in Dolt check out these
articles:

- [How Dolt Stores Table Data](https://www.dolthub.com/blog/2020-04-01-how-dolt-stores-table-data)
- [Garbage Collection in Dolt](https://www.dolthub.com/blog/2020-10-16-garbage-collection-in-dolt)
- [Generational Garbage Collection](https://www.dolthub.com/blog/2021-08-13-generational-gc)

## Online GC

Online garbage collection is a way to garbage collect table files while a `dolt
sql-server` is running. Using the offline implementation of garbage collection on a
running sql server couldn't work due to concurrent writes potentially referencing garbage
collected chunks. We needed to make some changes to Dolt to ensure online garbage
collection leaves the database in a useable state.

# Automated GC

We eventually want to support automated garbage collection during events that generate a
lot of garbage, such as file imports. It will need to be interruptable.

# How online garbage collection works

## Shallow GC

> Shallow garbage collection is a less complete but faster garbage collection that prunes
> unreferenced table files. Each `Commit` call creates a new table file. Once the maximum
> number of table files is exceeded, we conjoin them, which can leave behind some table file
> garbage.
> 
> During shallow garbage collection we iterate through all table files and remove any that
> aren't referenced in the manifest.
> 
> The two issues we needed to solve for shallow GC in an online context were:
> 
> 1. Preventing newly created table files from being garbage collected accidentally, and
> 2. Gracefully failing if a table file doesn't exist before writing the new contents to the
>    manifest.
> 
> We solved #1 by skipping any table file in the pruning process that has been updated more
> recently than the manifest. The second was solved by adding a check that all tables exist
> in the chunk source before updating the manifest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shallow garbage collection is a less complete but faster garbage collection that prunes
unreferenced table files. In normal operation, Dolt does not create unreferenced table
files which stay on disk for a long time. But during some operations, including server
shutdown, Dolt can leave behind unreferenced table files and various temporary files
 which will not currently be automatically cleaned up.

During shallow garbage collection we iterate through all table files and remove any that
aren't referenced in the manifest.

The two issues we needed to solve for shallow GC in an online context were:

1. Preventing newly created table files from being garbage collected accidentally, and
2. Gracefully failing if a table file doesn't exist before writing the new contents to the
   manifest.

We solved #1 by skipping any table file in the pruning process that has been updated more
recently than the manifest. The second was solved by adding a check that all tables exist
in the chunk source before updating the manifest.
```

new trees are constructed, they will write only the new chunks that are needed and
structurally share where possible.

![Mutating a Prolly tree](../../../.gitbook/assets/mutate-a-prolly-tree.gif)

During garbage collection, we use a [mark and
sweep](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tracing_garbage_collection) algorithm. Each chunk
that is reached in the commit graph has its hash marked as safe, all other chunks are
deleted from the store.

![Garbage collecting a Prolly tree](../../../.gitbook/assets/gc-prolly-tree.gif)

Unlike the CLI, using Dolt as a server allows multiple concurrent clients. If online
garbage collection runs concurrently with SQL writes, we can get dangling references. In
the garbage collection process illustrated above, if a write occurs that creates a new
Prolly-tree referencing a hash that's been removed during garbage collection, it will
create a dangling reference. Dangling references can corrupt the state of the database, so
in order to support online garbage collection we had to figure out a way to prevent
concurrent writes from creating dangling references.

### Implementation

> Our original approach for online GC was to block all writes while garbage collection was
> active and add a sanity check to all `Put` chunk calls for any dangling references.
> 
> Once we worked through a few issues that surfaced while implementing these sanity checks,
> we realized the sanity checks during `Put` caused significant performance regressions to
> writes. We were able to fix these regressions by speeding up the address walks during the
> sanity checks and by moving the sanity checks to commit time instead of `Put`.
> 
> The current version of online GC (which break all open connections to the running server)
> is available using the [stored procedure for
> GC](../version-control/dolt-sql-procedures.md#dolt_gc):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current version of online GC allows concurrent writes by adding newly written chunks
to the root set while the GC is running. Towards the end of the GC, we have to establish a
safepoint where we are certain we have seen every in progress write and that all the referenced
chunks will make it into the new files which make up the database. To establish this safe point,
GC currently cancels all in-flight queries and breaks all existing SQL connections to the server.

Only GC functionality is available using the [stored procedure for
GC](../version-control/dolt-sql-procedures.md#dolt_gc):
```
